# CSS Harmony

## Abstract 
This article has a goal to illustrate the effective way to write CSS in harmony with HTML markup, without loosing declarativity. 

## Typical frontend  project 
Let's create typical for nowadays frontend project using [`npm`](https://www.npmjs.com) tool. We are going to execute create script of a [vite@latest](https://vite.dev) package, using following bash script:

```bash
npm create vite@latest tmp
```

After changing directory to the freshly created `tmp` one, and executing linux `tree` command we are going to see the following output:

```bash
.
├── README.md
├── eslint.config.js
├── index.html
├── package.json
├── public
│   └── vite.svg
├── src
│   ├── App.css
│   ├── App.tsx
│   ├── assets
│   │   └── react.svg
│   ├── index.css
│   ├── main.tsx
│   └── vite-env.d.ts
├── tsconfig.app.json
├── tsconfig.json
├── tsconfig.node.json
└── vite.config.ts
```

As you can clearly see, `.css` and `.html|.tsx` files are located nearby. 
TSX is a subset of JSX - technology, introduced in [react](https://react.dev) community to merge HTML markup with JavaScript. Such files typically have same name, and located in the same directory, in order to provide some sort of more tighter bounding between markup and styles. 

## The Problem
Let's take a look on some average component written in JSX style, which is similar to HTML: 

```typescript
import React from 'react';

const UserCard = () => {
  return (
    <div className="UserCard">
      <h2>User Card</h2>
      <p>Display user information and logout button here.</p>
      <button className="button">See Profile</button>
    </div>
  );
};

export default UserCard;
```

Let's ignore the JS and React part and focus on a markup part of JSX, which brings us close to HTML. Let's try to imagine how `.css` could be implemented for such a UI component as `UserCard`. Let's take a look in our imaginary `UserCard.css` file: 

```css
.UserCard {
  background-color: #f7f7f7;
  padding: 20px;
  border-radius: 10px;
  box-shadow: 0 2px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
  width: 300px;
}

.UserCard h2 {
  font-size: 18px;
  margin-bottom: 10px;
}

.UserCard p {
  color: #333;
  margin-bottom: 20px;
}

.button {
  background-color: #ccc;
  border: none;
  padding: 10px 20px;
  font-size: 14px;
  cursor: pointer;
}
.button:hover {
  background-color: #bbb;
}
```

As we can see, this css is creating something like a two-leaf tree  

```bash 
:root
  |
  |-- .UserCard
  |    |
  |    |-- h2
  |    |-- p
  |-- .button
       |
       |-- :hover
```

But let's take a look on our html again, and determine the HTML structure in file, let's visualize an HTML tree here as well:

```bash
:root
  |
  |-- div.UserCard
       |-- h2
       |-- p
       |
       |-- button.button
```

The trees do not match, but what does it mean for the browser? According to documentation of [how browsers work](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Performance/How_browsers_work#building_the_dom_tree), we can expect that such a CSS tree, which is in official documentation called `CSSOM tree`, would be recursively applied on top of the `DOM tree`. That means that the alghorythm of traversing the DOM tree, by reaching our `.button` leaf, would search for the corresponding selectors in our CSS tree to apply additional styles. 
By specification CSSOM tree is not depends on DOM tree anyhow, and it should not. Algorythm is fast enough to process huge stylesheets vs huge DOM trees of elements. But from the developer perspective, let's try to analyse, how this algorythm would apply the styles for rendering, and imagine the parallel tree traversing logic, without any optimisations: 

1. Read the first node `.UserCard`:
    1. Start looking up for styles in CSS tree, put the cursor on the first CSS tree node. Match! 
    2. Apply the styles
2. Read the first child node `div.UserCard > h2`.
    1. Continue going through the CSS tree and go into the first child `.UserCard > h2` node. Match!
    2. Apply the styles
3. Read the second child node `div.UserCard > p`.
    1. Continue going through the CSS tree and go into the third child `.UserCard > p`.Match!
    2. Apply the styles
4. Read the third child node `div.UserCard > button.button`.
    1. Continue going throught the CSS tree. Run out of children on the cursor lvl
    2. Go up, to the next node `.button`. Match!
    3. Apply the styles

Are you able to see the difference between first three points and last one? The point __4.2.__ Seems like not brings a huge difference in context of the recursion, it looks perfectly fine. But what does it change for us? Let's add one more element to our markup:

```typescript
import React from 'react';

const UserCard = () => {
  return (
    <div className="UserCard">
      <h2>User Card</h2>
      <p>Display user information and logout button here.</p>
      <button className="button">See Profile</button>
      <button className="button secondary">Logout</button>
    </div>
  );
};
export default UserCard;
```

What our dead-simple algorythm would do with this new `button` element? Let's see: 

5. Read the forth child node `div.UserCard > button.button.secondary`.
    1. Start going throught the CSS tree again, put a cursor on a first CSS tree node `.UserCard`. Match!
    2. Looking further, go throught the leafs, `.UserCard > h2`, `.UserCard > p`. No full match..
    3. Going level up to the second node `button.button`. Match!
    4. Apply the styles. 

From this perspective we can see now, that the algorythm go for a search into a deeper levels of the CSS tree, and return cursor back without getting any results. Of course there are lots of optimisations which would allow the algorythm to skip such a "traps" whenever possible. But what about our understanding of how this styles would apply? Let's add some styles for a button on a level, where button is situated in DOM.

```bash
:root
  |
  |-- .UserCard
  |    |
  |    |-- h2
  |    |-- p
  |    |-- .button
  |    
  |-- .button
       |
       |-- :hover
```

What now? Can you tell exactly which styles would apply on a particular button not by making your eyeballs do the roundtrip throught the whole `.css` file? 

```css
.UserCard {
  background-color: #f7f7f7;
  padding: 20px;
  border-radius: 10px;
  box-shadow: 0 2px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
  width: 300px;
}

.UserCard h2 {
  font-size: 18px;
  margin-bottom: 10px;
}

.UserCard p {
  color: #666;
  margin-bottom: 20px;
}

.UserCard button.button {
  background-color: #eee;
  font-size: 16px;
}

.button {
  background-color: #ccc;
  border: none;
  padding: 10px 20px;
  font-size: 14px;
  cursor: pointer;
}
.button {
  background-color: #bbb;
}

```

Doesn't it feel like solving an additional puzzle in your mind? Imagine having larger project with bunch of common styles, several layers of components mixed together in a various of ways. Could you predict the styles? 

## The ergonomy
The example above illustrates the problem of ergonomy of an `.css` + `html` code which grows larger depending of how project grows. This typical problem could be solved in a various of ways. I know three of them: 

### Naming
Let's create more unique namings for the styles, adding more descriptive words. In such a scenario our  `.button` class would be written in a more specific way according to button role. e.g. `.UserProfileButton`. This is good approach to the extent. When your project is small, the number of components are low, you can easily create specific styles for their essential parts utilizing parts of their names as prefixes. 
This could be an ideal approach for the creative people who are in love with books, with a huge vocabularies in mind. Let's imagine such a css file:

```css
/* Primary Buttons */
.primary-button {
  // ...
}

/* Secondary Buttons */
.secondary-button {
  // ...
}

/* Primary Call-to-Action (CTA) Buttons */
.cta-button {
  // ...
}

/* Secondary CTA Buttons */
.secondary-cta-button {
  // ...
}

/* Social Media Buttons */
.social-button {
  // ...
}

/* Header Buttons */
.header-button {
  // ...
}

/* Footer Buttons */
.footer-button {
  // ...
}
```

Looks nice isn't it? Just spot the right styles and change them in one place! But wait a minute! Isn't this styles suppose to live in a different files? And yes, you are right, this styles would live in a file structure like this:

```bash
.
├── README.md
├── eslint.config.js
├── index.html
├── package.json
├── public
│   └── vite.svg
├── src
│   ├── App.css
│   ├── App.tsx
│   ├── assets
│   │   └── react.svg
│   ├── buttons.css
│   ├── components
│   │   ├── footer
│   │   │   ├── Footer.css
│   │   │   └── Footer.tsx
│   │   ├── header
│   │   │   ├── Header.css
│   │   │   └── Header.tsx
│   │   └── widgets
│   │       ├── motivation
│   │       │   ├── Advertisement.css
│   │       │   └── Advertisement.tsx
│   │       └── social
│   │           ├── Facebook.css
│   │           ├── Facebook.tsx
│   │           ├── Google.css
│   │           ├── Google.tsx
│   │           └── common.css
│   ├── index.css
│   ├── main.tsx
│   └── vite-env.d.ts
├── tsconfig.app.json
├── tsconfig.json
├── tsconfig.node.json
└── vite.config.ts
```
Would you be able to say which file the `.cta-button` styles are living in? Do you think they are unique, extensible or inherited? Doesn't it feel like we are cutting some lovely crafted CSS OOP concepts by utilizing our shiny cool vocabulary of expressive namings? 

We met the boundaries. Let's see the what the popular approaches offering to us? Let's meet our next fighter. 
Today is the fight between Mike Tyson versuuus !!!:

### CSS Modules
Seems like CSS modules have a nice chances isn't it? Even users without rich vocabularies could use them! Let's see how our code could change. Let's see our buttons file first:

```css
// buttons.css
button.primary {
  // ...
}

button.secondary {
  // ...
}

// Advertisement.css
button.primary {
  // ...
}

button.secondary {
  // ...
}

// ../social/common.css
button.primary {
  // ...
}
// ...
```

Now let's see some code which includes markup with various types of buttons, e.g. in file `Advertisement.tsx`: 

```typescript
import React from 'react';
import styles from './Advertisement.module.css';
import commonStyles from '../../../buttons.css';

const Advertisement = () => {
  return (
    <div>
      <h2 className={styles.header}>Get Started Today!</h2>

      <p>Register now and receive a 50% discount on your first purchase!</p>

      <button className={commonStyles.primary}>
        Register Now!
      </button>

      <div style={{ marginTop: 20 }}>
        Or, schedule a demo to see our product in action!
      </div>

      <button className={styles.cta}>Schedule Demo</button>
    </div>
  );
};

export default Advertisement;
```

It looks like we can control the styles fully, the modules system allow us to utilize completely unique name for each css class we are going to use, all of them are situated on a level-1 of our `CSSOM tree`. It gives us styles literally nailed down to our markup. Very safe! But what about inheritance, what about OOP? What if we want to debug our resulting web-interface?:

```html
<button class="primary-46fabac648">...
```

It would be a luck to see such a names in front of hashed values. Honestly!

### Ergonomic Approach
Let's imagine the website written in a fashion, where the CSS tree actually matches the resulting HTML tree. Every CSS node has corresponding HTML Element on a web interface, and even if we are going to exotically mix-up the elements and involve usage of an external component libraries we are still having enough specifity to fix all CSS collisions in place where they are belong to. Let's use `SCSS` syntax to describe such approach returning back to our first basic example, spiced up a little with CSS module system, but just a little:

```scss
:local(.UserCard) {
  background-color: #f7f7f7;
  padding: 20px;
  border-radius: 10px;
  box-shadow: 0 2px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
  width: 300px;

  & > h2 {
    font-size: 18px;
    margin-bottom: 10px;
  }

  & > p {
    color: #666;
    margin-bottom: 20px;
  }

  .button {
    background-color: #ccc;
    border: none;
    padding: 10px 20px;
    font-size: 14px;
    cursor: pointer;

    &.secondary {
      opacity: .8;
    }

    &:hover {
      background-color: #bbb;
    }
  }
}
```

Let's take a look on a markup, in a project utilizing `global` scope behaviour for `css.modules`, so only explicitly local classes would be turned into hash:

```typesript 
import React from 'react';
import styles from './UserCard.module.scss';

const UserCard = () => {
  return (
    <div className={styles.App}>
      <h2>User Card</h2>
      <p>Display user information and logout button here.</p>
      <button className="button">See Profile</button>
      <button className="button secondary">Logout</button>
    </div>
  );
};

export default UserCard;

```

Look how intuitive it looks. Only top level component class contains hashed value, and all other __inner__ styles are isolated from the outer scope. The CSS structure now fully mimicks the markup one, and even the tree traverse algorythm would never look for the empty results (at least we are in charge now to control it). What is the cons of such an approach? 

There is couple of them (but): 

1. It could happen that the styles coming from the external libraries can add some style props to our simple named `.button` properties. But let's be honest, all modern css libraries are configurable with _prefix_. 
2. It could happen, that the styles of exported libraries written by other teams could have some styles for such a common classes. But again, most of the times, all such a libraries are trying to incapsulate the styles under overused css modules, or even go with inline styles approaches. 

Let's take a look at the pros again: 

1. Readability. Our namings are clear and following clear rules.
2. Importancy. Do you remember `!important` flag? Just forget about it. All your inner styles under the css module has now higher specifity than any of the global ones. 
3. Better mental picture. Remember `style` attribute? now just imagine utilizing css selector operators like `>` and `,` or even just `<space>` and SASS folding mechanics using `$` inside the curly bracers, we just detach `style` context from the `style` tag and move it to the proper `css` place. Still saving the space for _extreme_ `style` injections. 

## Conclusion

We got familiar with common problems of css styling in a large and intermediate sized projects, and reviewed common ways of solving such an issues. Let's cut the line here. 

It doesn't mean which way we are going to follow to simplify your engineering basement but we should always consider the ergonomy of the code in order to save the _ingeneering space_ , reduce complexity. We, as an engineers, should always be able to support the cutting edge of technology any time it reflects the light of the market view.  


Thanks for reading!
